---
layout: post
title: The EDA University Center for Regional Economic Innovation
---
"A network for bringing innovative ideas into action for Michigan."<!--excerpt-->

Working out of [MSU REI](https://reicenter.org/) for the past year and a half has been an excellent experience. Built to leverage existing assets to create a network that funds and disseminates innovative ideas, tools, and models that spurs community and economic development. It's somewhat similar to the partnership models of LEAP or MEDC, where a coalition solves local, regional, and state-wide problems.

REI creates and disseminates knowledge through Co-Learning Plans; Student-led, Faculty Guided Projects; and Innovation Fellows. By crowdsourcing ideas from Michigan residents, REI ensures that it is on the cutting-edge of research, focusing on problems that need to be solved now. It provides the funding, as well as research support, a network of collaborators, and publicizing of the results.  Typically a year-long process, it ends at an Annual Summit, inviting influential economic development professionals, community members, and others.

REI focuses on growth through sustainable methods. It’s key to understand that we can’t allow Michigan’s natural resources to go to waste, or view dilapidated structures as impediments. Instead, REI understands such features as opportunities, for restructuring, tourism, reuse, and recycling.

Check out, for example, Aquahouse. Once abandoned houses, Aquahouse provides a model – currently being implemented – that turns them into greenhouses which supply cheap, healthy produce for disadvantaged communities.

{% include youtubePlayer.html id="2U_im6GcunA?ecver=1" %}


Or, take a look at Women Who Weld, a program which teaches women welding skills through a dynamic program to ensure they have well-paying positions.

{% include youtubePlayer.html id="OMXiVW7ntZA?ecver=1" %}

REI provides informative models for entrepreneurs to spur small business in Michigan as well. For example, understanding the Pop-Up Business Model is integral to growth. REI supplements online information to ensure entrepreneurs have the best chances to succeed.

{% include youtubePlayer.html id="o0-GiCcAV94?ecver=1" %}

Connect with them on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/groups/4330903), [email](mailto:rei@msu.edu), or [Twitter](https://twitter.com/MSU_REI). They offer grant and collaboration opportunities that are excellent for research and implementation, producing numerous videos, workshops, and programs. [Join the network!](https://reicenter.org/networks/join-the-rei-networks)  
