---
layout: post
title: Individualism through Political Identities
---

Defining ourselves through politics isn't the primary issue - it's that we define ourselves at all. <!--excerpt--> Yesterday, David Brooks of the New York Times published an op-ed, [When Politics Becomes Your Idol](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/30/opinion/when-politics-becomes-your-idol.html?hpw&rref=opinion&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=well-region&region=bottom-well&WT.nav=bottom-well), explaining that in the midst of the decline of community, religion, sociality, and general spiritualness, many "use partisan identity to fill the void left when their other attachments wither away." This initial sentiment is largely correct, and he continues:
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
It should be said that people on the left and on the right who try to use politics to find their moral meaning are turning politics into an idol. Idolatry is what happens when people give ultimate allegiance to something that should be serving only an intermediate purpose, whether it is money, technology, alcohol, success or politics.</p>

In other words, the general focus on citizens is now on the politics as a process, rather than its proposed ends. Attaching to partisan identities provides a person with a tribe - a tribe often similar in beliefs, interests, and class - that enhances a sense of safety, control, and self. By becoming attached to a political party, we're renewing a false illusion of how we make decisions; outsourcing the need for thought, action, criticism, we learn something about ourselves, we think. Ironically, it's a measure of how Americans may further define and document their individuality by further incorporating beliefs and characteristics into their personality. Being a Democrat is an anchor within a cruel inexplicable world, with values of compassion and idealism. Being a Republican engenders toughness and hard work to overcome the challenges set before you. 

We live in a state of disorientation. The uncertainty, the existential angst, the nausea, the emptiness in your chest, the feeling of being unfulfilled that is constantly present in our thoughts is unavoidable, despite our attempts at self-distraction. Any entity or activity that promises to relieve us of this sentiment, inviting us into its arms, we respond to with willingness and gratitude. It's the constantly-on television, the frequent scrolling through social media sites, and of course, the political parties. These fascinate our attention, pulling us in so we don't have to be attentive to our worrying thoughts of the pain and pleasure, fame and obscurity, praise and criticism, gain and loss. 

The constant conflicts and scandals distract and entertain us while pleasing and angering us. Yet it is a righteous anger that partisan identity provides, and one that reinforces a sense of self. It distracts from the more serious issues and questions that must be asked. Why read esoteric philosophy when you can listen to Pelosi or Ryan? It is a set of moral standards that we've internalized without questioning, and it is for partly this reason that difficulties exist in communicating with the opposite party. Yet these parties, at closer inspection, are much more similar than people think. Our squabbles are less so over democracy or tyranny but of how to better distribute these rights. We're [high on our outrage](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/24/us/politics/partisanship-republicans-democrats-pew-research.html) over topical issues while the foundations are cracking beneath our feet.

Brooks somewhat touches on parts of this, in slightly different terms. However, I believe he is mistaken in his conclusion, arguing in the last three paragraphs that (forgive the lengthy quote):
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
Politics these days makes categorical demands on people. It demands that they remain in a state of febrile excitement caused by this or that scandal or hatred of the moment. But it doesn’t actually transform life or even fill the hole left by the lack of other attachments.


If politics is going to get better we need better myths, unifying ones that are built on social equality. But we also need to put politics in its place. The excessive dependence on politics has to be displaced by the expulsive power of more important dependencies, whether family, friendship, neighborhood, community, faith or basic life creed.


To be a moderate is to be at war with idolatry. It’s to believe that we become free as we multiply and balance our attachments. It’s to believe that our politics probably can’t be fixed by political means. It needs repair of the deeper communal bonds that politics rest on, and which political conflict cannot heal. </p>

It is the last two paragraphs that I take issue with, as fail to correspond with the reality of the situation. Brooks' introduction, noted that the general decline of "stable families, tight communities, stable careers, ethnic roots or an enveloping moral culture." A return to these "deeper communal bonds" is integral to a revival of civil politics. Yet the foundation and organization of society goes much deeper than community does, despite his romanticized and nostalgic impressions of what America once was portray. 

Brooks' plea for a "better myth" is meaningless and ill-considered. After complaining about a politics that has attached itself to fundamental values (paragraphs 5 to 8), why would replacing it with another myth be anything but a continuation of our current trajectory? Is a better myth more persuasive? Just one he agrees with? Rather than encourage an invasive examination of our moral values, he seems to be advocating for another politician to simply tell a better story to the needy masses. He [invokes this research](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/26/opinion/republicans-trump.html?_r=0), and does not seem to grasp that it is not just some attachments that are damaging, but all. His selective reasoning, based on his own principles he clutches tightly too, offers no respite from the current political climate.

Moreover, he fails to recognize that identity itself may be the problem. He encourages a reevaluation of our attachments, to rearrange our priorities to those which he considers to be morally fit. Just as he asks for better myths, he is merely replacing one distraction with another. This sense of community he encourages isn't anything more then switching our attention from the TV to our contemporaries, and is a band-aid to the real issue at stake. Of course, Brooks [isn't the only one](http://guyanatimesgy.com/need-for-unity-and-political-bipartisanship/) - [this seems to be a](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/made-by-history/wp/2017/07/12/partisanship-is-an-american-tradition-and-good-for-democracy/) [fairly common misconception.](http://guyanatimesgy.com/need-for-unity-and-political-bipartisanship/) Again, the focus shouldn't be how we view other communities, but how we understand ourselves - or rather, the collected desires, dislikes, fears, anger, and emotions we've attached ourselves too.

It is an issue of our need for self-definition, for our constant desire to retain control of the situation we find ourselves in and a sense of permanence. Our technological progress and values of efficacy and consumption strip away chosen identities (e.g. religion, family, morals) and assign new ones in turn (e.g. worker, consumer, Democrat, Republican). When we find ourselves excluded from these identities, our reaction is negative. Shunned from the circle around the fire, outcasts instead wrap themelves in whatever ragged cloth and warmth they can find (e.g. nationalism, protectionism, racism).

Replacing undesired attachments with Brooks' preferred values is not a long-term solution. Shedding these attachments, however, is a viable path ahead. Discarding layer after layer of our personality traits, beliefs, desires, we find nothing but awareness. Through disciplined cultivation, we may operate outside of myths and attachments that bind our identities to our politics. 

Brooks has it wrong when he states that politics has become our idol. It's not that our identities have been subsumed by politics, but that we idolize our identities to the point that we've made politics personal. Brooks quotes this phrase in relation to politics, but ironically, it is the opposite - the illusion of the self - about which he should be more concerned with.
<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
“All idols begin by offering great things for a very small price. All idols then fail, more and more consistently, to deliver on their original promises, while ratcheting up their demands. ... In the end they fail completely, even as they make categorical demands. In the memorable phrase of the psychiatrist Jeffrey Satinover, idols ask for more and more, while giving less and less, until eventually they demand everything and give nothing.” </p>

Further Reading

The Righteous Mind - Jonathan Haidt
