---
layout: post
title: A Recommitment to Community
---
An Op-ed in the National Review, [Don’t Go Bowling Alone: Recommitting to Community in 2018](http://www.nationalreview.com/article/454956/bowling-alone-community-organizations-reinforce-democracy), could go farther. <!--excerpt-->

The essay is decent, and the book is too, from what I've heard. Yet a discussion I've been having lately with a close friend encouraged a bit of clarification on why this essay needs to further question the role of community in society. There seems to be a consensus that Americans are facing a social crisis. But the why is shrouded in debate, and O'Brien shrugs off this question, leaving the heavy lifting to Bowling Alone. Unfortunately, this results in nothing but a rehash of arguments already made - just weaker.

O'Brien demonstrates uses Tocqueville and Bowling Alone to demonstrate why community (voluntary associations) is integral to a functional democracy and in limiting government overreach. Nothing wrong with that. Yet his seemingly reasonable prescription is flawed. While his underlying assumptions aren't made clear in the essay, his narrow scope inherently limits, if not precludes, the success of his solution.

The first aspect of this argument I'd like to address is the role of community in society: what does it provide us with? Or in a historical context: why, and how, did voluntary associations emerge and continue? O'Brien's limited conception of community, that is, as a tool to support democracy, doesn't answer this question. Expanding this conception of community, however, and it's clear that voluntary associations contributed to survival. Through natural selection, it's reasonable that skilled collaborators have better chances at survival, and this is clear [in multiple species](https://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/44901/title/The-Evolution-of-Cooperation/). Cooperation works. 

Now, this next part, I don't have conclusive proof for, merely circumstantial, so don't take this next part for granted. Social isolation, or more particularly loneliness, contributes to [adverse health effects](https://www.verywell.com/loneliness-causes-effects-and-treatments-2795749) in many people. Humans have long been described as [social animals](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/183896-man-is-by-nature-a-social-animal-an-individual-who).

It seems entirely reasonable to suggest that we have an instinctual drive for company as we psychologically associate it with survival. The deprivation of this results in a feeling of unfulfillment. Just from experience, it seems that when life is going well, it's much easier to be in solitude. Yet when I perceive of external issues, it's easier to be lonely. Loneliness is uncomfortable because our mind is telling us to get out of the house, socialize, and reproduce. 

For the majority of human history, voluntary associations in all forms were integral to survival. Yet as technology has advanced, as society has become more interconnected, our necessary interactions/value to society has decreased. From a tribe of 20 to a state of 1 million, for example - each person has a smaller role to play, and not as essential. The recent trend of everyone is important isn't true, and that is difficult to grapple with when childhood ends. Secondly, through a market-based economy, it's less necessary to interact with the human component of the production process. With technology providing for so many of our needs, we don't need other people to survive. This, I think, introduces an uncomfortable sensation; our minds tell us to meet people, but this desire can be delayed through other forms of technological gratification, and we feel a bit of emptiness in our chests. In 13 seconds, though, the next Netflix episode will start automatically, and we forget about it for another 30 minutes.

Bowling Alone, I believe, addresses many more of these factors. Yet O'Brien's argument doesn't focus on this individual aspect of community, instead choosing to illustrate the benefits of community in sustaining democracy. And O'Brien's solution isn't persuasive for this reason. A commitment to community already failed - so why should a recommitment be any more permanent? I don't know many people who would say, "yeah - democracy is in danger, so I joined a baseball league. We're good now." Plenty of political pundits have been speaking about the need to confront other political viewpoints than your own - and to what extent can we convincingly say that this push was successful? I don't see much to show for it. 

O'Brien conflates the decline of community with the increase in political polarization. And while they are certainly interrelated, his solution is a temporary patch. It's the following response that is everywhere on the establishment conservative side: 

Traditional norms are being eroded, and giving way to moral questions that humans have always had to face. In the past, we tempered desire through force (i.e. state, religion) and it worked. We just need to reinsert these permanent answers to what is good and bad into society, and everything will be alright. 

This is why I wish O'Brien went further in the essay; it adds nothing to the conversation. It's not enough to simply encourage community in an attempt to re-implement traditional norms in the closing paragraph of an op-ed. *How* this happens is the question. We need to develop a better understanding of the individuals themselves, and understand how to incentivize community through a new moral basis. The essay is right in noting that community is a key institution in society. But it offers no suggestion on how to actually engender compassion.

Saying democracy is in danger isn't a motivator for people to reach out to the other side. It's encouragement to further reinforce a mentality of us vs. them, to point out that their existing political and social beliefs offer the solution. O'Brien doesn't promote understanding for the sake of understanding, but for the sake of winning. Community can't be the means to an end, and from this essay, it's not clear that the author understands this.
