Japan’s Economy-Focused Environmental Policy
	In the 20th and 21st century, sustainable development has posed numerous difficulties for Japan. The island-state does not have enough domestic natural resources to sustain a population of nearly 130 million and GDP of nearly $5 trillion in the long-term, forcing a heavy reliance on imported materials for production.<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>  Japan’s rapid economic development after the destruction of World War Two left its domestic environment in shambles by the mid-1970s, resulting in heavy pollution in urban areas, public health incidents, deforestation, and massive waste disposal issues.  Since then, Japan has attempted to balance environmental policy with industry needs, making great strides in solving some domestic and global issues, while severely lagging in other areas.  Understanding this, the null hypothesis of this analysis is that Japan is a swing vote which bases its decision-making on international environmental agreements out of perceived economic self-interest. 
  
	Out of the 29 international environmental agreements sampled, Japan has acted as a lead state on 8, a swing state on 16, and a veto state on 5. Of course, these categories are rough estimates compiled from a wide variety of sources, and should not be taken as conclusive proof, but as indications of general trends in Japan’s activity concerning international environmental policy discussions. It is apparent Japan’s behavior varies widely across issues.
  
	On climate change, Japan tends to be a swing state on global agreements, but leading in regional approaches. This demonstrates that Japan is more interested in pursuing immediate environmental safety while maintaining sovereignty on many issues.  Japan is also a swing state on species conservation and biodiversity efforts. Japan is historically willing to adjust its position based on access to markets and reputational concerns.  Yet for ivory, whaling, and tuna – three issues which are prominent in Japanese trade and culture – Japan tends to veto most regulation in favor of its own interests despite heavy international pressure.  Japan’s position on hazardous waste, toxic chemicals, and pollution generally shift in accordance with domestic industry interests.  Most of the progress on these issues has come from limiting harmful effects due to previous pollution issues during post-WW2 development.  
  
	While banning certain chemicals, and cleaning up domestic areas, Japan is wary of new regulation which could limit future use and technological advancement. On protected areas, Japan is interested in cooperation inasmuch perceived benefits exist.  For example, Japan contributes massive amounts of international aid as ‘dollar diplomacy,’ which encourages countries to side with Japan on other issues.  Despite this, Japan recognizes the long-term needs for imports; concerning timber, for example, it is actively involved in ensuring an uninterrupted flow through international agreements.  Its reliance on foreign resources, however, means Japan emphasizes a sustainable, anthropocentric approach to international species and protected area efforts, rather than a preservation approach.  Concerning water issues, Japan’s access to open waters is vital to the island-state. It focuses on ensuring free access to resources and area as much as possible while protecting national coastline amid direct economic competition and disputed territory, causing it to veto as much international regulation as possible, but lead in regional policy to ensure its interests are protected during tensions with China and North Korea. 
  
	Overall, Japan’s varied negotiation positions across each issue indicate a pattern of economically-motivated decision-making.  Yet this process is shaped by Japan’s interest in being increasingly active on the international politics. The priority remains solving Japan’s problems, rather than international issues, evidenced by taking more leadership roles in regional matters.  For example, after the Fukushima disaster, Japanese public opinion deprioritized climate change to focus on sustainable and safe energy.  On world agreements, Japan is more hesitant to submit to increased regulation. Its policy is largely self-interested; matters that highly affect Japan encourage a leading or veto role, whereas on low priority areas, Japan is willing to accede to other political interests, depending on the cost. Of course, each policy decision is multi-dimensional. Secondary concerns such as reputation, culture, and political concerns have overridden industry concerns on occasion. Actions on the ivory trade and fisheries are linked to interest in maintaining a productive U.S.-Japanese relationship, and progress in limiting hazardous chemicals is often made in consideration to increasing international status and appeasing public attitude due to Japan’s environmental issues in the mid-to-late 20th century, respectively.  Domestic Japanese politics are based on consensus building, and strong relationships between politicians and interest groups strongly affect the environmental agenda. 
  
	Japan’s record in compliance is mixed. In general, the difficulty of implementation is inversely related to its record of compliance, within the agreements sampled. Agreements which only require financial assistance and knowledge transfer are complied with to a large extent, as in the case of the 2008 Japan-UNDP Joint Framework for Climate Change in Africa, the 2015 Project for Japan - Caribbean Climate Change Partnership, the 1996 Desertification agreement, and the 2013 Minamata Convention. 	Yet Japan’s record of compliance with hazardous waste and tuna conservation treaties is extremely poor. Japan is the largest consumer of the Pacific Bluefin tuna, and its participation in international environmental discussions is largely to protect its own interests by preventing harsh restrictions on fishing, rather than actually protecting the species.  By taking some action on conserving the fish however, Japan is able to limit reputational damage and ensure that Japan has access to tuna. As for hazardous waste, Japan is a large producer of hazardous waste due to its high-tech production industry. This decreases the willingness to cooperate, as large economic benefits exist for continued production. Domestic NGOs have little influence on compliance compared to industry interests.  Yet domestic activism does play some role; concerning the Ramsar Convention, public and NGO pressure has “extended Japan’s commitment and support” to the agreement.  In general, environmental policy is largely top-down.  This perhaps allows for greater compliance in treaties which are important to the administration, even if difficult; this is indicated by the Japanese government’s compliance in fisheries agreements with Russia, China, and South Korea. 
  
	Japan often operates on domestic industry needs to ensure economic security for its citizens.  The null hypothesis was fairly accurate. As a developed country with solid international standing, the country has some influence over environmental matters, especially concerning financial or knowledge transfers on the international level, and on regional issues such as fisheries, species conservation, and climate change. Through this, the country is emphasizing that developing countries should be contributing just as much as developed countries in environmental matters.  Japan often forgoes environmental targets if there is a large enough negative impact on the domestic economy. Yet reputational concerns and the desire to be an international actor has consistently encouraged an active role in environmental negotiations since the 1980s.  The country enjoys its status as a leading state in Asia on environmental policy matters, but often is unwilling to compromise in areas that are culturally or economically important to it. 
  
	These insights offer some predictions on the performance of Japan in the 2015 Paris agreement. Japan has ratified the agreement after a small delay. Commentary from a Japanese newspaper criticized the administration as a “virtual nonentity” at the Paris talks.  Its contributions included advocating for language to ensure that other major greenhouse gas emitters would be held accountable.  Recent criticism has appeared on Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s endorsement of coal burning technology for economic growth.  A member of the Japanese delegation during climate talks noted that “the Paris Agreement will force Japan to fundamentally change its reliance on fossil fuels like coal for power.”  As demonstrated in past agreements, international policy that imposes large constraints on Japanese economic interests generally fails. Yet Japan is incentivized by the emphasis on a growing clean energy market, encouraging rapid development to gain market share in the market-based mechanism proposed for carbon trading in the Paris Agreement.  With recent political changes in the U.S., it is possible that Japan may renege on its commitments if it feels it is not fair to other developed countries, or it could be that Japan utilizes this opportunity to take leadership on the international stage.  
  
	To ensure Japan’s cooperation, it’s important to lessen costs of compliance, as well as invoke reputational costs to non-cooperation. Japan’s environmental approach is also heavily shaped by its understanding that it is reliant on foreign raw resources, so to mitigate worries about long-term sustainability would be helpful, either by guaranteeing future raw material imports or through financial assistance perhaps. Also, as indicated by its stance during negotiations, Japan needs to have assurances that other developed countries will operate by the same set of standards. Its statement on acceptance reflects the approach taken in other agreements, emphasizing progress without stemming economic growth, developing innovative technologies, and providing technological and financial assistance to developing countries.  Moving forward, it is important to demonstrate to Japan that both developed and developing countries are taking their commitments seriously, and that taking action on international environmental matters is integral to maintaining Japan’s overall welfare.
  
1. <b id="f1">1</b>CIA World Factbook “Japan” Central Intelligence Agency. 2016.[↩](#a1)
2. Miller, Alan S., and Curtis Moore. "Japan and the Global Environment." Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum. Vol. 1. No. 1. 35-56. Duke University School of Law, 1991. See also Wong, Anny. The domestic roots of Japan's international environmental policies. UMI, 1998.
3. https://www.env.go.jp/en/policy/plan/intro.html
4. Chasek et al. (102, 166) See also Schreurs, Miranda A. Environmental Politics in Japan, Germany, and the United States. Cambridge University Press, 2003. (253).
5. Weiss, Edith Brown, and Harold Karan Jacobson. Engaging countries: strengthening compliance with international environmental accords. MIT press, 2000. (273)
6. Bauer, Sarah E. (2016) "Picking Up the Slackline: Can the United States and Japan Successfully Regulate Commercial Fishing of Bluefin Tuna Following Failed Intergovernmental Attempts?," Indiana Law Journal: Vol. 91: Iss. 5, Article 8. (4).
7. Weiss, Edith Brown and Harold Karan Jacobson. Engaging Countries : Strengthening Compliance with International Environmental Accords. The MIT Press, 1998. Global Environmental Accords (281).
8. https://www.oecd.org/env/country-reviews/2450219.pdf (2)
9. Chasek et al. (58).
10. YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (18).
11. Weiss, Edith Brown, and Harold Karan Jacobson. Engaging countries: strengthening compliance with international environmental accords. MIT press, 2000. (274)
12. YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (10).
13. Chasek et al. (99).
14. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (12).
15. YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (3).
16. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (7).
17. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (5).
18. Email leppekj@gmail.com if interested in table data. Also, YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (3).
19. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (14).
20. www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/04/20/national/science-health/sushi-alert-new-report-sees-grim-outlook-bluefin-tuna/#.WP0qjugpBDs See also http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/19/science/earth/19species.html
21. Chasek et al. (55).
22. http://web.isanet.org/Web/Conferences/AP%20Hong%20Kong%202016/Archive/a8e68aad-9abf-4add-8273-a77714949d15.pdf (16).
23. YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (3).
24. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (2).
25. Sofer, Ken. Climate Politics in Japan: The impacts of public opinion, bureaucratic rivalries, and interest groups on Japan’s environmental agenda. Sasakawa Japan, Forum Iss. 1. 2016. (3).
26. YU-JOSE, LYDIA N. "Global Environmental Issues: Responses from Japan." Japanese Journal of Political Science 5.1 (2004): 23-50. Print. (1).
27. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/12/16/national/japan-virtual-nonentity-paris-climate-talks/
28. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/12/16/national/japan-virtual-nonentity-paris-climate-talks/
29. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-climatechange-paris-japan-idUSKBN1330J9
30. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/12/16/national/japan-virtual-nonentity-paris-climate-talks/
31. http://www.tokyofoundation.org/en/articles/2016/paris-agreement-and-japans-energy-risks See Dimitrov, Radoslav S. Global Environmental Politics MIT. 16:3, August 2016, doi:10.1162/GLEP_a_00361
32. http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/12/16/national/japan-virtual-nonentity-paris-climate-talks/
33. http://japan.kantei.go.jp/97_abe/statement/201611/1219866_11019.html



This piece was produced for MC 450, Spring 2017. 
