---
layout: post
title: Politicians and Morals
---

No, it won't get better, even if the Republicans lose. <!--excerpt-->

A day later, [Krugman posted](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/30/opinion/republican-tax-lies-fed.html) a piece on the "moral rot" pervading the current Republican Congress & Administration, indicating an aspect of Fukuyama's political decay.

Is integrity a value of the past? Again, Krugman's characterization of rot implies that some level of foundation once existed, that the steel beams of honesty have rusted over and the concrete has cracked. He, and others, I think, are emphasizing the wrong issue here: what's worrying is that the political foundation was never robust enough to support the weight of massive moral social divisions. In other words, the political framework doesn't allow for sustained cleavages in American society. It shouldn't be surprising that politicians are consolidating power and placing party loyalty over social benefit. In times of social upheaval, politicians respond accordingly and desperately.

A few simple examples can demonstrate this. Vehement disagreement on maintaining and expanding the practice of slavery, a social & economic issue, resulted in the American Civil War; in the lead-up to the war, an argument for states rights [developed *in response* as the justification](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGQeEKeBkZ8), while still enduring for certain people today, isn't convincing, nor sound. Solving the issue through political means wasn't possible; the two weights bearing down on the structure at opposite ends split in the middle, and radical means were necessary to reform the foundation. The Civil Rights movement, the 14th, 15th, 19th amendment, the response to the Vietnam War and other peace movements - each of these placed an unbearable pressure on American political structures. It seems that democracy cannot sustain social cleavages for long; release, at some point, is needed. This either happens through the removal of the cause for the pressure i.e. wars ending, reduction in the pressure i.e. topical issue moving out of public opinion, or a shift in the foundation i.e. court decision, constitutional amendment.

America has a memory problem. Frequently, a white male working class looks back fondly on the second half of the twentieth century and the post-WWII growth - it was simplistically framed, often, in terms of progress; the new normal wasn't stagnation, but steady expansion in economic and social terms. But these 50 years were [the exception](http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/Piketty2014Capital21c.pdf), not the norm (slide 24). Serious cultural threats to power came from abroad rather from within, and with major social advances, the stratification of society in economic terms emerged, relatively unhindered. Many current politicians recall this promise of living in comfort, of moving from the middle to upper class, and against the barrage of criticisms, those politicians seek to return to an America they knew, a simpler America. In the midst of a readjustment of power dynamics, politicians are acting as they always have: desperately attempting to retain their influence.

We've increasingly relied not on a consistent moral foundation, but on consistent political institutions, in American government. It is the aspect of consistency - in general, that all those in power had many of the same assumptions - that allowed for sustained collaboration across competing interests for non-existential issues. With the end of the post-WWII boom, the whole of American society now faces issues that only minorities dealt with previously (This isn't to say that those issues are of equal severity, which is the mistake that many white nationalists are making now. Just a taste of the longstanding social pressures and responsibilities of women, African-Americans, and other minorities is so foreign and repugnant to this segment of the population that rejection is a preferable approach to acceptance.) Our political institutions, those that informally regulate bipartisanship and compromise, fail when tested. There is no incentive for politicians to abide by such institutions, especially with re-election at stake.

In conclusion, it's not surprising that political institutions have rapidly collapsed, and the Republican's recent actions on the tax bill are indicative that what Krugman identifies as moral rot has its roots outside of politics. The focus, however, needs to be placed on how we ensure political bodies continue to operate despite widespread social divisions. With different basic assumptions on what society should look like, what is the minimum level of shared moral values necessary for cooperation to continue?
