---
layout: post
title: Decreasing Trust in Institutions (1.5 of 2)
---
Institutions are less expected to provide spiritual fulfillment (for instance, nationalism), and more so security, equality, and justice. <!--excerpt-->

I listened to Monday's [Econtalk](http://www.econtalk.org/archives/2018/02/helen_pluckrose.html) and read the [corresponding essay](https://areomagazine.com/2017/08/22/a-manifesto-against-the-enemies-of-modernity/), which raised a few questions for me on the topic of resilient institutions, so we'll continue where we left off in the [last post](https://grassrootsphilosophy.org/In-Institutions-We-Trust/). This post applies Lindsay & Pluckrose’s distinctions to the topic of resilient institutions, and further explores the reasons for declining trust in American institutions.

My personal position is that life is a daily balancing between certainty and uncertainty, and I have difficulty abandoning this viewpoint. The two primary questions of what we do and why we do it can be adequately explained by what seems to be a universal human pursuit of certainty within an impermanent and uncertain world. It's through this lens that I read the aforementioned essay by Lindsay & Pluckrose, one that describes three narratives: postmodernism, oriented around the power relationship between the oppressed and oppressor; modernity, the 'standard' center position and Enlightenment ideals; and premodernism, largely around tradition and individual liberty. I would recommend reading the essay, but I can describe them bluntly. Postmodernism criticizes how we arrived and the results. Modernity examines what is. Premodernism criticizes the change that occurs and what has been lost.

There seems to be a ripple effect with regards to declining trust in institutions. As pointed out across the Internet, Americans have declining trust in [many institutions](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/americans-dont-trust-their-institutions-anymore/), exacerbated by partisan environment. Postmodernists deconstruct informal and formal institutions and commonly accepted truths, decreasing the level of participation and inducing change. Modernists accept reasonable changes based on their values of truth, liberty, etc. Once premodernists notice that informal institutions are collapsing, they turn to formal institutions, meant to safeguard informal institutions, and assign blame. As one falls, another goes. All three notice the vulnerabilities within the system and continue on the offensive to champion their cause on the left/right political spectrum. Lindsay & Pluckrose rightly note that the New Center will fail to counteract, or even effectively hinder, these attacks. 

What pre/post modernists are both oriented against is the values that underlie the institutions. Lindsay & Pluckrose point out, and I'm inclined to agree, that a large majority of the population would agree with the basic principles of modernity. To this, the focus of this post isn't how to construct institutions impregnable to these attacks from antimodernists - criticism from the opposing positions is important to better include minority positions and improve social structures - but how to engender resilient trust among the population in the process of improving informal and formal institutions.

To answer this question, I think we can turn to [Foucault]( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=keLnKbmrW5g), and view institutions through their power in society. Despite my minimal knowledge of his work, I think what follows is appropriate, but still reductive. Informal institutions contain normalizing power and construct individuals passively. Decisions ‘freely’ made produce optimal societal outcomes. Formal institutions are stanchions of oppressive power, actively restricting.  Studying institutions through a lens of power relations better describes the current political polarization around long-standing institutions. It allows us to emphasize the utilitarian nature of institutions. As such, attitudes toward institutions reflect changing perceptions of how well those institutions distribute power. 

The prominent dismissal of institutions by the pre/post modernists and the subsequent adoption of these views by political parties has decreased trust in American institutions. What seems to be happening for many citizens is the conflation of values and institutions. True pre/post modernists, as described by Lindsay & Pluckrose, in their critiques of commonly accepted values in American society, point to the weaknesses in institutions as evidence for their argument.  Hearing this, members of the public who do not critically examine these arguments are prone to accepting the perceived weaknesses in institutions as enough evidence that the values themselves are flawed. 

America’s partisan, quick-paced, and action-oriented environment exacerbates the willingness of people to accept this position.  Institutions are meant to reflect a certain value system. They are often inaccurate and work better in theory than in practice. Yet the widespread embracing of the assumption that institutions cannot be improved is worrying. 

Let’s illustrate this. There is an increasing awareness of [systemic inequality]( https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/white-democrats-have-gotten-way-more-liberal-on-identity-issues/). Social structures that naturally evolved and consciously built often favor dominant segments of the population. Arguably, every American citizen believes that some type of reform is needed, whether that be of a politically progressive or conservative bent. Yet there is a sense of growing dissatisfaction in the population that existing structures are capable of such shifts. It’s odd – both the political right and left are working to reclaim their individual agency from formal institutions. Rather than retaining it, however, political parties are giving up their power to populist social movements: the right, to pre-modernists; the left, to post-modernists. Each expect the replacement of existing social structures with new ones that better reflect their values. In other words, big government isn’t a problem; it’s big government that doesn’t align with their beliefs.

This, I think, explains recent [interest]( http://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content/political_commentary/commentary_by_tony_blankley/the_authoritarian_temptation) in authoritarianism within the political spectrum, especially among [young Americans]( https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/21/opinion/the-crisis-of-western-civ.html?_r=0). Democracy is inefficient and often ineffective. But common American narratives don’t reflect this, further damaging trust in institutions, and therefore, values. A country built on values of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness neglected and actively repressed minorities. It’s difficult to blame people for a lack of distrust. What’s now wanted by a majority of the population, I suspect, is the rapid implementation of a new institutional system that better reflects the values that Americans were always expected to support. However, this isn’t happening. The resulting dissatisfaction has been co-opted by pre & post modernists to sow confusion about whether current processes are robust enough to handle reforms. 

-----
Institutions are naturally resilient. Informal institutions, practiced by a majority of the population, will take time to fade away. Formal institutions are backed by monopoly of force. 

Change, however, is rapid. Technological progress, abetted by a consumerist mentality, allows American citizens to be less reliant on social structures such as the family, community, or government. Younger generations are moving away from obtaining certainty from external institutions and increasingly developing it internally. With our cultural emphasis on individualism, this was only natural. Institutions are less expected to provide spiritual fulfillment (for instance, nationalism), and more so security, equality, and justice. 

This essay isn’t meant to judge the merits of such a shift, but to identify the dangers that arise during the process. Impatience with the process is concerning. It encourages alignment with more radical positions and partisanship. It decreases formal engagement, preferring more action-oriented approaches that signal results. It disregards the institutions as pathways for change and turns instead to the upheaval of underlying structures.

In the next post, I’ll expand on this conclusion, especially how the role of institutions has changed over time. 





