---
layout: post
title: On Death; A Recap
---
Thursday, 4/26/18. <!--excerpt-->

We spoke, last night, on death. The following is a brief recapitulation of what we discussed. Hopefully I've accurately restated various arguments and provided them with their best justifications; if not, feel free to reach out at grplansing@gmail.com to request an adjustment. Interjections of comments are marked within em dashes.

The intent of these written follow-ups is to connect a few key statements from our conversations to previous philosophical work directly. For those interested, it will help place current thought within the history of philosophy and connect you with further resources that will clarify/refute thoughts. Let me know if it is helpful/not, or if the format should be adjusted.

w/r/t death:

Why be afraid of death? Many of us at the meeting indicated that they were not especially intimidated, for a few reasons:
- Faith

All [major religions](patheos.com) invoke life after death as a major component of how to live the current life. 

- Rationalization

Death is the natural next step. Without death, why would I value anything? There is no reason to fear it - [once it comes, I'll be gone](https://classicalwisdom.com/epicurus-the-nature-of-death-and-the-purpose-of-life/).

*It depends on whether life after death is a concept you agree with or not. No one indicated that they were afraid of nonexistence, that is, not-in-itself, but as a loss of consciousness.*

----

Living on in memory. While a person may not be alive, they have had an impact on those around them, through their actions, lineage, or words. 

----

Suicide rates in across the world vary, even in highly industralized countries like South Korea and Japan. How does quality of life relate to willingness to die?

----

Death is framed often as the cessation of action. People, occasionally, don't even seem alive while living. 

Enduring questions:
- What constitutes a 'good' or 'bad' death?
- What exactly marks death? Is it morally permissible to 'pull the plug,' so to speak, on coma patients, for example?
- How to prepare for death?
